Young man, in mathematics you don't understand things. You just get used
to them.
Reply to Felix T. Smith who had said "I'm afraid I don't understand the
method of characteristics." —as quoted in The Dancing Wu Li Masters: An
Overview of the New Physics (1984) by Gary Zukav footnote in page 208.

A large part of mathematics which becomes useful developed with
absolutely no desire to be useful, and in a situation where nobody could
possibly know in what area it would become useful; and there were no
general indications that it ever would be so. 
--- John von Neumann

If people do not believe that mathematics is simple, it is only because
they do not realize how complicated life is.
--- John von Neumann

If one has really technically penetrated a subject, things that
previously seemed in complete contrast, might be purely mathematical
transformations of each other.
--- John von Neumann

"Mathematics is the art of giving the same name to different things."
Henri Poincaré.
(This was in response to "Poetry is the art of giving different names to
the same thing.")

The difference between mathematicians and physicists is that after
physicists prove a big result they think it is fantastic but after
mathematicians prove a big result they think it is trivial.
Lucien Szpiro during Algebra 1 lecture.

Oh, he seems like an okay person, except for being a little strange in
some ways. All day he sits at his desk and scribbles, scribbles,
scribbles. Then, at the end of the day, he takes the sheets of paper
he's scribbled on, scrunches them all up, and throws them in the trash
can. --J. von Neumann's housekeeper, describing her employer.

You know, for a mathematician, he did not have enough imagination. But
he has become a poet and now he is fine.

D. Hilbert, talking about an ex-student.

"The art of doing mathematics is finding that special case that contains
all the germs of generality." -- David Hilbert

"Everyone knows what a curve is, until he has studied enough mathematics
to become confused through the countless number of possible exceptions",
F. Klein (from Reed & Simon: Methods of modern mathematical physics)

"A mathematician is a person who can find analogies between theorems;
a better mathematician is one who can see analogies between proofs and
the best mathematician can notice analogies between theories. One can
imagine that the ultimate mathematician is one who can see analogies
between analogies."

--Stefan Banach

"Good mathematicians see analogies between theorems or theories. The
very best ones see analogies between analogies."

--Stanislaw M. Ulam quoting Stefan Banach

Mathematics, rightly viewed, possesses not only truth, but supreme beauty
-- a beauty cold and austere, like that of sculpture, without appeal to
any part of our weaker nature, without the gorgeous trappings of
painting or music, yet sublimely pure, and capable of a stern perfection
such as only the greatest art can show. The true spirit of delight, the
exaltation, the sense of being more than Man, which is the touchstone of
the highest excellence, is to be found in mathematics as surely as
poetry."
Bertrand Russell, in Study of Mathematics, about the beauty of
Mathematics.

If I feel unhappy, I do mathematics to become happy. If I am happy, I do
mathematics to keep happy.
------ Alfréd Rényi

"Obvious" is the most dangerous word in mathematics.

Anyone who cannot cope with mathematics is not fully human. At best he
is a tolerable subhuman who has learned to wear shoes, bathe and not
make messes in the house.
Lazarus Long, "Time Enough for Love", (Robert A. Heinlein)

Since the mathematicians have invaded the theory of relativity, I do not
understand it myself anymore." --Enstain 

Mathematics may be defined as the subject in which we never know what we
are talking about, nor whether what we are saying is true.
Bertrand Russell, referring to the axiomatic method, where certain
properties of an (otherwise unknown) structure are assumed and
consequences thereof are then logically derived.

Do not worry about your problems with mathematics, I assure you mine are
far greater. --- Enstain 

Das Wesen der Mathematik ist ihre Freiheit. 
--- Cantor

The simplest schoolboy is now familiar with facts for which Archimedes
would have sacrificed his life." --Ernest Renan

If I have seen farther than others, it is because I have stood on the
shoulders of giants.
--Isaac Newton

If I have not seen as far as others, it is because there were giants
standing on my shoulders.

--Hal Abelson
